Welcome to Puresonality.com. We’re glad to have you here.

First off, perhaps Puresonality is a misnomer, as funny as that sounds. Puresonality.com is not here to define 'personality types' or anything of that sort. Quite the opposite, I aim to equip people to understand the variety and enormous range of unique, different, and wonderful personalities that there are.

Puresonality.com is my effort to educate people about something called Jungian Cognitive Functions, which are essentially tools of thought that humans use to work with any and all forms of information, including, well, literally anything that one can think about. Simply said, how human thought processes work. Jungian Cognitive Functions, acronymed J.C.F. for short, or just Cognitive Functions, are what humans use to think about the world. You are using your cognitive functions right now! That also includes your siblings and parents, your next door neighbor, and anybody else human.

Jungian Cognitive Functions are named after Carl Jung, a Swiss Psychoanalyst who lived from 1875 to 1961, who posited them in his famous book "Psychological Types". Carl Jung founded analytical psychology, an area of thought that supposed that the human psyche can be understood through observation and analysis. This website is not primarily focused on explaining Jung's beliefs as he saw them, but rather explaining the concepts he was seeing and attempting to describe. This means this website is not primarily in line with things as Jung claimed them to be. But I digress.

In essence, this site aims to explain the root tools of thought that humans use to work with the world- *how people think.* Perhaps you've heard statements from other people that strike you as bizarre that somebody would even say, or seen talents others have that you feel are far outside or your capability. Maybe you've experienced a situation where something so obvious to you is completely missed by another, and at other times found a friend who is 'on the same wavelength'. What if I told you that you could learn how to understand these situations, and see why and where these differences and similarities occur?

Because Cognitive Functions explain human thought ( and much more as you'll discover ) the explanatory power of J.C.Fs extends into anything human made, including philosophy, biology, human relations, speech, argumentation, and of course Psychology.

Situations where people are 'polar opposites', where one person 'has their head in the clouds' and another 'is down to earth', where somebody is 'logical' and another is 'emotional', are all within the realm of explanation of J.C.Fs.

The information contained in this website offers profound insight about the workings of life, the universe, and everything. There is no topic or situation for which this information does not apply to in some shape or form. Again, a bold claim, but I would not be making it if I did not think it was not just true, but truth.

Many have already learned and applied the information in these pages to their lives, and have found it a revelationary experience. They have found that Cognitive Functions have created a new foundation and viewpoint for seeing everything they already knew about people and the world in a new light. They have seen human complexities unravel to reveal deeper and more interesting sides to already established truths, and gained greater understanding about people, and confidence in their own cognitive strengths and understanding of their weaknesses.

As this information applies to everything, you can try and test it as you learn more to find your own understanding of it. But the most important thing is that you have a desire to persist, as the real value in what is offered here is not in the first few minutes of reading, but after you've begun the true journey down the rabbit hole. The most you have to lose is a couple hours of thought provoking reading, and the most you have to gain is a completely new understanding of everything. It's your choice, so decide now.

Although I do try to stay true to Cognitive Functions in the sense of keeping the information 'pure' and to divide my personal opinions and biases from the content itself, I will be making some decisions on content in terms of what I feel is most truthful or correct, even if it isn't proven. This will happen in places such as history sections and commentary on that history, and when discussing proper and ethical treatment of others within the context of J.C.Fs.

The information in this website is completely free, written solely for the benefit of the reader, to the joy of the writer. There are no ads here, and I am not trying to sell you anything (only on the ideas posited here) although donations are greatly appreciated. This website was created with my own time and talents for others' benefit, and I expended great personal resources to make it a reality. You can donate on Patreon:
All Patreons will be included on the "Thanks To" page, found here: 

Lastly, you've probably noticed the tabs at the top, and looked through them a bit. Each tab has some articles listed, but the tab view does not have all the available material listed. By clicking the tab, or hovering and selecting 'overview', you'll be able to see all articles in that section. You can learn how to navigate this site here: or see the full site map here:

Best of luck, Ben Jacobs



At this point, you can continue on through this section by clicking the 'next' button at the bottom of the page, and you'll be perfectly fine, but I wanted to provide a sense of where everything is, so you know what you're reading. The final note would be that because the goal of this section is just as an introduction, and not a full explanation, brevity is taken over full explanation. So, don't take it word for word, but do seek to understand the general concepts. Best wishes!

This section is the opening section, which will introduce you to the essentials and basics of Cognitive Functions. How they work, what they are, who discovered them, and so on. After this, the other sections take each idea discussed in this first section and explore them in much greater depth. In theory, you could skip the opening section, but if you've never heard of Jungian Cognitive Functions before, this is not advised. If you have heard of Jungian Cognitive Functions and have explored them in depth, you'd best move over a 'tab', and begin on the next section. 

First, I introduce a very brief 




Overview
Function Eval
Jungian Cognitive Functions
Basic Context
Introversion and Extroversion
Function Methods
The 8 Cognitive Functions
The Function Stack
CF Revisited
Terminology and Notation
Review and Conclusion
Next Steps


