Carl Jung first proposed in his book 'Psychological Types' that individuals have mental processes which allow them to process certain data. A cognitive function has two parts. The first part is the "Method" which determines how the cognitive function processes information. The second part of the function is the "Attitude". The attitude determines which area the function draws information from. In essence, a function is the combination of a method and an attitude. In the next two sections, we will look at these two pieces of a function in depth.

This article on Jungian Cognitive Functions is in the introductory section. If you were looking for the full article, you can go HERE OR HERE

When working with cognitive functions, it is important to think in complementary opposites. The concept of two opposite, yet complementary entities is foundational to nearly all aspects of our world. Daay and night, positive and negative, protons and electrons, day and light, the color wheel, good and evil, male and female, macroscopic and microscopic, light and dark, we have two hemispheres of the brain, two sides to our body, two eyes and ears. While not everything necessarily has an opposite, many things naturally come in, or are reliant upon complementary opposition. In cognitive functions, complementary opposition enables us to have separate faculties fulfil different aspects of our cognition. For example, you would not kick a ball with your hand, or write a poem with your feet. You could, but it would be difficult. Your hands and feet are each better suited for (specialized) for certain tasks. In that same way, cognitive function involves using different tools for opposite purposes, which compensate for each other's weaknesses. This will be explained in depth later.

(This section is the introductory section, so all the articles in this section will not be completely accurate, as a slight compromise must be made in order to provide a step by step understanding of the concepts. Therefore, they are mostly correct, but not exactly correct.)

Keeping this in mind, the next section will discuss the two places a function can receive its information from.
