In this article, we explore the basic upbringing of Jungian Cognitive Functions, and their Journey to modern understanding, which this website is about. You can skip this section and not miss any vital information, but it does provide a better sense about how Cognitive Functions came to be. This page only covers a small portion of a greater historical context. You can read more about the history in the [ADVANCED HISTORY] page.

As the name of Natural Selection is tied to the name of Charles Darwin, so too do Cognitive Functions have an origin. Carl Gustav Jung (pronounced "yung") was a Swiss psychoanalyst, who took an analytical approach to understanding behaviour and psychology. Jung worked closely with Sigmund Freud, but in later years made an effort to explain his differings with Freud in his works. Still, the idea of analyzing behaviour for underlying mental systems, like Freud, is characteristic of Jung. He made contributions to many fields, but is perhaps most notable for his book, "Psychological Types". In "Psychological Types", published in 1921, Jung proposed that all people have the same basic cognitive attitudes, but that those mental attitudes exist in different propensities. He identified several consistent archetypes and patterns of thought in people and influential works, and explained how these are the result of the aforementioned cognitive attitudes.

Jung's works have been studied, debated, and drawn upon from many different psychologists and other scholars, who have developed many different theories and interpretations from his work. Today, one specific theory has been extrapolated from Jung's work, and developed into a structure that is generally agreed on, and holds great explanatory power. While it is unprovable in its current state, when thoroughly tested through experience and analysis, it accurately describes and explains cognition.

This theory is called Jungian Cognitive Functions, which is the purpose of this website. Jungian Cognitive Functions, or JCFs for short, are different mental functions which people use to mentally interact with the world and their understandings of it. You and I are using these functions right now. They are, in essence, different mental tools which we use in different ways and in varying strengths.

Perhaps you've heard of something called MBTI, or the Myers Briggs Type Indicator, a test developed by Isabel Myers and Katherine Brigs. This website has nothing to do with that, in any sense. If you have any knowledge of it, then I ask that as you read this material you wholly forget about it. There is no meaningful connection between the ideas that will be discussed here and the ideas presented by the MBTI. Indeed, the MBTI is inaccurate, and people often miss-associate Cognitive Functions and MBTI. The two are in theory and practice completely unrelated. You can read more about the horrors of MBTI here:

Nonetheless, this historical explanation is very very watered down, but sufficient to understand the context of this theory.

In the next section, I explain most fundamental aspect of Jungian Cognitive Functions, introversion and extroversion.

