

"In the following pages, I shall attempt a general description of the psychology of the types, starting with the two basic types I have termed introverted and extraverted."

"The introvert's attitude [is] always intent on withdrawing [energy] from the object, as though he had to prevent the object from gaining power over him. The extrovert, on the contrary, has a positive relation with the object. He affirms its importance to such and extent that his [internal] attitude is constantly related to and oriented by the object."
Carl Jung, Psychological Types, Chapter X


{ move to footnotes
"The introvert's attitude is an abstracting one; at bottom. He is always intent on withdrawing libido from, the object, as though he had to prevent the object from gaining power over him. The extrovert, on the contrary, has a positive relation with the object. He affirms its importance to such and extent that his subjective attitude is constantly related to and oriented by the object."
Carl Jung, Psychological Types, Chapter X
}

In Jung's Psychological types, he proposes two general dispositions amongst, and within people; which are the introverted and extroverted dispositions. 'Intro' means 'inward', 'extro' means 'outward', and 'vert' means 'to turn'. Hence, introversion is a 'turning inward' and 'extroversion' is a 'turning outward'.

Introversion and extroversion are called 'functional attitudes', or 'attitudes' for short. They determine whether a cognitive function looks internally or externally for information. In other words, if the function has an introverted attitude, it takes in information from within one's self. If the function has an extroverted attitude, then it takes in information from outside one's self.

Everybody has both introverted and extroverted functions, which we use to process different information in different ways. We use introversion to reflect on the world, and evaluate our own thoughts and ideas, while we use extroversion to evaluate the external physical world.

Introversion relies on contextual thinking to solve problems. In this sense, a particular piece of the problem is not isolated, but is part of a whole. For example, if you hear a gunshot, you would probably be surprised, and perhaps be ready to react quickly to a bad situation. But, if you heard a gunshot at a shooting range, because of the context, it would not frighten or alarm you. Introversion relies on this contextual analysis to solve problems on a large scale.

Introversion focuses primarily on the self, and one's own observation of reality. The one thing that connects everything you have ever witnessed and experienced, the one thing that combines all that you know into one central location, is you. You are the center of all things you have witnessed. Though you can move from one room to the next, though you can change your location, the fact that it is you who are witnessing those two locations does not change. In this same sense, introversion seeks to combine everything into one singular whole. Introverts seek to examine many different experiences, and find what remains the same despite the change. You might think of it like this: If you take a chair and flip it upside down, you know it is still a chair. So, we know that direction is not a determining factor in what a chair is. If your friend says she likes bubblegum today, and she says the same tomorrow, you might conclude your friend is a bubblegum liker, so to speak.

Another aspect of introversion involves determining how things always are; how they were, and will be, and the general tendency for things to remain static despite change. You might understand it this way: suppose you take a piece of paper and fold it in half. Is it still a piece of paper? What if you drew on it? What about if you put a small tear in it? Is it still a piece of paper? What if you tear it in half? At this point, you might say it's really two pieces of paper. But what if you taped it back together again? Then is it still the same piece of paper? This is simple example shows how introversion looks at different states of the same thing in order to determine what remains the same despite the change. In this example, it is what makes a piece of paper a piece of paper. Essentially, we use introversion to identify unchanging characteristics about changeable objects. In order to identify these unchangeable characteristics, introversion has to focus on multiple experiences of an entity. When dealing with the paper, we looked at several different states the paper was in to see if it was still paper. In this same way, introversion looks at different experiences to find what does not change.

Int

For introversion, focusing on one experience alone, or on the physical world is untrustworthy. The world is always changing, and only through removed observation can one truly see how things actually work and operate. This stepping aside of reality, though it enables introversion to understand consistent behaviour, it is not so good at dealing with randomness, change, and unpredictability. Introversion is slow and methodical, so when it is given problems to solve very quickly that seem to have no rhyme or reason, it is not very good at solving these problems.

In people, when introversion is used more than extroversion, they can find themselves distant from the world, and can ignore it. They often have a fear of the physical world, and an inability to properly interact with it. This can manifest in forgetfulness of physical things, in a fear of interacting with people and objects, or perhaps in a fear or dislike of trying new things. They often even refuse to fix physical problems because they may refuse to believe it is happening, or not wish to expend the energy to fix it. This is not to be an overshadowing weak point however.

Still, introversion remains adept at solving problems by pondering over them, and slowly coming to a final conclusion. Ultimately, introversion aims to understand the world by comparing different pieces of it to see how the puzzle fits together. 

Extroversion.


Extroversion is expressive, in a sense. It is always moving, and aims to take in a breadth of information, rather than a depth of it. Extroversion likes to immerse itself in the world, and explore, and to experience and influence the external world. Takings note of the beauties, oddities, structures, and possibilities that exist, extroversion is realistic, and generally finds comfort in physical reality and interaction with it. 

Extroversion is aimed at the external, real and physical world. Every physical place, object, or moment in time is very unique- much like, say, a painting. Each painting is a one of a kind, irreproducible, unique creation. Like a painting, every moment, event, object, and such, have 'brush strokes' and 'scenery' that make them unique from any other. This is one of the interests of extroversion, to experience and map out these unique details of the world.

While introversion focuses on contextual thinking, extroversion focuses more on individual item based thinking. As a simple example, for introversion, the example of a gunshot was used. While introversion may focus on where the gunshot was heard, and how its meaning Is based on the context, extroversion might focus on the gunshot itself. Was it near, or far? What did it sound like, and what direction did it come from? These are questions that extroversion may focus on, and would be very fast at resolving. While this is speculative, in essence, extroversion is focused more on the inherent nature of the item than where or how it is encountered.

One way to look at extroversion is like such. If I asked you to describe green, could you? You might call it cool, or soft, or use whatever adjective you wish, but try as you might, you would not be able to adequately convey 'green' to me. Ultimately, green is green. Green is inherent in itself, and witnessing it is understanding it. Additionally, green is real. Green is not something made up. It is tangible. You can see something green, and you can touch it. In this sense, for extroversion, reality takes precedence over all else. 

You might also imagine this scenario: You are standing in front of a very angry bear, and it wants to eat you. It will not help you to consider your best escape route, because you don't have time. You need to run immediately, or you'll be eaten. In this example, there is a matter that requires immediate reaction, and hesitation will cost you. Extroversion is very good at this split second thinking, as is needed in situations like these. You never know for sure what will happen, and have to react to it as it comes, else you will miss a beat, skip a step, and fall on your face.

These two examples explain the essence of how extroversion processes data and sees the world. It is good at fast thinking, and is always trying to see reality for what it is, and adapt to it.

While there is great value in being able to take in the world in quickly, and adapt, extroversion is not well suited to careful analysis. While focusing on reality as it appears to be, it misses the parts of reality that are real, but not immediately apparent. Somebody who relies too much on extroversion can find themselves subject to chronic problems- problems caused by persistent influences and happenings that will not simply disappear, but need careful inspection to isolate the source and fix the problem. Though this sounds harmless, it can lead to the extrovert making the same mistake over and over again, because he did not take the time to remove himself from his situation, and reflect on it. It can also result in distrust in explanations because they don't seem to have any real concrete base, but are actually real, only very complicated and have many facets that can't be seen directly just from looking at it.

For example, you can look at the engine of a car, and have absolutely no clue how it runs. It's not magic, or made up, its real, and it works. What if it starts leaking, or making strange noises, and you have no clue how to fix it? Without a careful search and analysis, the problem will remain hidden until the motor no longer works. While this is clear with the analogy of an engine, it is not so clear whether or not a problem is complex or not, and therein lies the problem. It is not uncommon for an extroversion to make a short lived assumption or judgement about the nature of something, and to leave the matter at a conclusion far short of answering the complicated problem. While this mentality may allow them to solve a great number of small problems, it leaves persistent  and seemingly unanswerable questions as such.

That said, extroversion still has great strength in working with reality. Extroversion enjoys exploring the world for what it is, and shows us that there is much to explore and create in the world around us.

Each side has opposing toolsets to work with, but both introversion and extroversion are necessary and complimentary tools that enable us to reach goals faster by focusing our energies on different parts of the same goal. A screwdriver and a hammer are completely different tools, but both have their different uses, and neither is better or worse than the other.

These opposing natures of introversion and extroversion compliment and balance each other out within us as individuals.
