In this section, we cover the actual Jungian Cognitive Functions, and how they work. In the next section, we will discuss how these 8 functions work in an individual, giving them a context for you to understand how they work together within an individual's psyche.



Several articles ago, a function was as the combination of an Attitude (introversion or extroversion) and a Method (Thinking or Feeling, or Sensing or iNtuition). We have covered these two components of a function, and now we see how they work together.

As said previously, a function is the combination of an attitude, and a Method. The two attitudes, introversion and extroversion, and the four Methods, Thinking and Feeling, and Sensing and iNtuition have been explained in order to lay the foundation for this section.

There are 8 possible combinations of Methods and Attitudes, and these are the Jungian Cognitive Functions:

Attitude	Method	Full Title	Shorthand Notation
Introversion	Thinking	Introverted Thinking	Ti
Introversion	Feeling	Introverted Feeling	Fi
Introversion	Sensing	Introverted Sensing	Si
Introversion	Intuition	Introverted Intuition	Ni
Extroversion	Thinking	Extroverted Thinking	Te
Extroversion	Feeling	Extroverted Feeling	Fe
Extroversion	Sensing	Extroverted Sensing	Se
Extroverted	Intuition	Extroverted Intuition	Ne

Notice the notation for the functions. We use the first letter of the Method, capitalized, and attach either a lower case 'i' or 'e' to denote the attitude. The pronunciation for the shorthand of each function are in order from top to bottom, 'tee-eye', 'eff-eye', 'ess-eye', 'en-eye', 'tee-ee', 'eff-ee', 'ess-e', and 'en-ee' (The pronunciation looks a little silly written out like this, but that's how they're pronounced).
Also notice that Introversion starts with an 'I', so if we used that for the function notation, it would be 'Ii' and 'Ie' for the Intuitive functions, which is awkward to say and look at, so we take the second letter of intuition, 'N' and use that to form 'Ni' and 'Ne'

The full title and the shorthand of a function are completely interchangeable, and will be used interchangeably moving forward, so take a moment to look back at and understand the chart above.

We discussed in the Function Methods article that there are two kinds of function Methods, Judging Methods, and Perceiving Methods. Functions that are formed with these Methods borrow the tittle of the Method Type. Ti, Te, Fi, and Te are all called judging functions, and Si, Se, Ni, and Ne are all called perceiving functions. This handy tree shows the full categorization and name of each function.

JCF2.png

Ji means "introverted judging function", Je means "extroverted judging function", Pi means "introverted perceiving function" and Pe means "extroverted perceiving function." In the chart, you can see that the notation in the square identifies the kind of function that the two functions next to it are.

THE 8 COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS

Each function has a unique and specific way it processes information, and this way it processes information. Because a function can process a very wide range of data, it is not so much the data that it pays attention to that defines it, but rather, the way that it works with that data. In other words, it is not WHAT the function processes, but HOW.

This can make describing the functions somewhat difficult, because while the input and output can be observed, sometimes the process itself is difficult to explain. So, while you are reading the descriptions, focus on what kind of thought process might generate the ideas that are described, rather than the examples themselves that are used to illustrate the concept.

Additionally, something that has not been directly recognized is the exact way in which the function is a tool a person uses, and how the behaviour of the function is part of the way it functions. In many cases prior this has been left 'up in the air', so to speak. While these functions are mental tools used by people, part of what makes them powerful and flexible is their definitive nature, or in other words, their fixed aspects, and what makes them what they are. The function has definitive characteristics and utility that allow the person to whom the function belongs to use it flexibly and powerfully. They cannot alter the function itself, but they can use it how they choose. An artist may use a paintbrush how they please, but the paintbrush is a paintbrush, and the artist must accommodate this. Because of this the painting must be painted a particular way, as the paintbrush operates. So, the painting will have 'brushstrokes' but nonetheless that is what enables to painting to be painted in the first place. So it is with functions: the inherent nature of the function can lead users of that function to seeing the world a certain way, or understanding things a certain way because of the nature of the function, so recognizing that paradigm or perspective can help one to understand how the function itself works. That said, this particular subject will be resolved in the next article, so for now, understand that whether we are supposing a person is using a function, or we suppose the function has 'a will of its own' so to speak, it doesn't quite matter for now.

When the function is described in this way: " users of [some function] believe that [some belief]" or "users of [function] tend to have [quality], it is not so much a hard and fast rule, but a general belief or tendency people with that function usually have that helps illustrate how the function itself operates.

JUDGING FUNCTIONS

EXTROVERTED JUDGING FUNCTIONS

Extroverted Thinking

Extroverted Thinking, or Te, is the thinking method with the extroverted attitude. In this way, it evaluates data according to its mechanical behaviour, and takes its data from externally, outside oneself. 

Extroverted Thinking uses external data to determine what should be done in a certain environment to get a result. You might picture this as 'stepwise', 'get from A to B' thinking. Te users are 'doers' and like to get things done simply and effectively, and move to the next thing. Extroverted Thinking, in essence, evaluates environments for what should be done about them. For example, they might see a leaking faucet, and fix it with ducttape, or perhaps they need to get groceries, so they go to the store. This is because they are constantly evaluating what needs to be done about certain things, and thus are, in a way, naturally compelled to fix those problems efficiently.

Te users are not as concerned about something akin to theory as they are about practically solving problems and attaining a specific endpoint. Extroverted Thinking analyzes objects for their characteristics, and how it can use these to get a result. In this sense, the word 'tool' is a good descriptor for how Te sees things. This is not to been seen as necessarily negative; rather it is to be understood that Te sees things in terms of its objective usefulness, which allows Te users to swiftly and effectively accomplish whatever they need to by virtue of understanding how best to get the job done.

Previously, I mentioned that you might picture Te as stepwise. This picture is a useful one. Like dominoes toppling, or pool balls ricocheting off one another, Extroverted Thinking analyzes processes to see how something moves when it is pushed. In this sense, when they wish to reach a desired result, they know that they simply need to perform a certain task, or do a certain thing to achieve it. Emphasis here on the words 'do' and 'perform'. The term 'active' could very much describe Te, because it pays attention to the motion and movement of things. B will not happen unless A is done. Do A to get B. In this same vein, Te users often have a very direct manner about what they do. They *move* to *accomplish*, to *perform*, in a *direct* manner, to *execute* the *actions* to *achieve* a *result*. While the image of a business man doing everything in his power to make his business a success is not entirely spot on, it is in that same idea that Te could be understood to see the world.

In short , Extroverted Thinking qualitatively analyzes the real world to understand how things move, allowing Te users to know what to do to achieve the results they desire, efficiently and effectively.

(patchwork) vs ti (indirect)

Extroverted Feeling

Extroverted Feeling, or Fe, is the feeling method with an extroverted attitude. In this way, it evaluates data according to its significance, worth and value, and takes data from external sources.

Extroverted Feeling is concerned with something's significance. It determines what is desirable, or meaningful, and makes decisions and actions based on this. It is constantly determining whether something is desirable, or undesirable, significant or insignificant, and endeavoring to obtain or not obtain something based on that.

A key component in Fe lies in its usage and dependence in emotionality. Fe users have fluid emotional states, they freely express emotion, which is often inspired or mirrored from their environment. They like to experience sights and sounds, and are always looking for something to invoke feeling in themselves. When in conversations with others, their faces are in motion, as they tend to shift their facial expressions and tones of voice to match whatever is being spoken about. Alongside this, they are adept at picking up on the facial expressions and tones in other's voices, from which they identify and connect with the other's emotional states.

Fe users are typically primarily concerned in something for what it makes them feel. They are people-people, and enjoy interacting and talking with people. As such, they are also very skilled in interpersonal skills, and innately know how to work with people to reach mutual understanding and agreement. Extroverted Feelers see people as the main engine of change, and see value in working together to achieve a goal. Their desires are often very people based, and they can be some of most kind and heartfelt people.

Fe itself makes judgements on what something's value is; what it has to do with the Fe user. This judgement of value often comes directly alongside an implication to act. For example, if an Fe user decides that they like doing a certain task, they will endeavor to do it, or that if they like a certain style of clothing, they will wear it, or if they like a certain person, they will work to be around said person more. For each judgement, on a small or large scale, they usually decide to act to fulfil that desire, because the judgement in and of itself implies an action to be made. Because of this, they have trouble sitting still and not acting when there is something they desire or deem worthy to gain. Extroverted Feelers are very good at getting where they desire to go, and can be very determined and driven people.

Essentially, Extroverted Feeling makes judgements about how significant or worthwhile something is, which often is accompanied by an emotional understanding or feeling compelling them to act to fulfil the desire or emotion. They are very good at reading other's emotional states, and enjoy working with and being around others to reach harmony.

INTROVERTED JUDGING FUNCTIONS

Introverted Thinking

Introverted Thinking, or Ti, is the Thinking Method with the Introverted Attitude. In this way, it evaluates data according to its mechanical behaviour, and takes its data from within ones self. 

Introverted thinking uses logical analysis to understand how multiple components within a context work as a whole. Those who have introverted thinking often take into account many different parameters and variables in a context to understand they ways in which they interact. Several examples of what somebody may use Ti for in the given situations, somebody may use Ti to:

	- Listen to a song and break down how each instrument contributes to the whole song.
	- Look at how a puzzle works, analyze what they can do with it, and determine what actions complete the puzzle best (Rubik's cube, etc.) On a jigsaw puzzle, perhaps, they may look at the pieces and analyze what factors they can use to determine how the pieces fit together, for example, color similarities, shape, and then organize and attempt to find matches based on those factors.
	- Calculate which of several routes is quicker. Perhaps while driving, a Ti user could notice that there were two considerable routes to a destination, and determine the quicker route by comparison.

Ti is axiomatic, and theoretical; Ti users often have train of thoughts that assume that certain ideas are true, and see what can be deduced or thought about insofar as the assumption is true. The book, Principia Mathematica by Bertrand and Russel attempted to use logical proofs to prove mathematical theory, such as the number 1. The book starts with certain core axioms, and uses certain theorems to prove higher theorems, all in the goal of solidifying number theory. Ti is much like this, it relies on elementary axioms and supposes higher ideas, but their truth value is contingent on the initial axioms. [[COMPUTING]]. Examples of this train of thought can be found in the 12 tone scale (also called 12 tet for equal temperament) in music theory. The music is in supposition of a 12 tone scale, but the scale could also have 13, or 11, or 98 notes. From the 12 tone scale, most western songs are generated. Analyzing the 12-tone musical scale to understand the characteristics and behaviour of western music is something a Ti user might do.

The data Ti takes is from within one's self. What this means is that 

Ti users often think ( and sometimes overthink) about problems, philosophical or otherwise. While they don't always reach clear conclusions, they enjoy thinking about the question out of curiosity. While their approach is not 'black or white', 'yes or no', 'once and for all' answer to a question, leaving the topic open-ended allows them to make adaptations as needed because of this flexibility.

All in all, Ti analyzes frameworks to understand the variables and parameters of how they work. From this, they can understand how each piece interacts with the whole, which under certain circumstances makes the answer to a certain question or problem clear.

Introverted Feeling

Introverted Feeling, or Fi, is the Feeling Method with the Introverted Attitude. In this way, it evaluates data according to its importance and value, and takes data from within ones self.

Introverted Feeling uses value based and emotional reasoning to consider what is proper and improper, significant and insignificant within a certain context. Fi users often have a long list of things they like and dislike, and also a great deal of things they think are right and others they feel are wrong, and often have an internal hierarchy of significance. Questions of morality and ethics, and to some extent law, are often on the minds of Fi users, and they often consider what is just, fair, or proper in certain situation.

Fi users have deep, personal feelings that they take time to puzzle out within themselves, and understand. They might be questions of morality, or perhaps they feel a certain way about something, and they are trying to figure out why. But at the root, they are experiencing deep feelings which they seek to understand.

Fi is very individualistic. Fi users and their beliefs are very tied to the Fi users themselves, as a sort of extension from the way they see and feel about the world.

..include?:

Like Ti, Fi is also axiomatic. However, rather than focusing on the 'mechanical' nature of things, it focuses on the 'moral' nature of things, in essence. A line of thought for an Fi user might be, 'Government is, in root, a small subset of a group of people that acts in the best interests of the group. Therefore, a government that makes decisions outside of the will of the people it governs is no longer fit to govern." In this example, the conclusion is contingent on there being a group that makes decisions, and further conclusions stem from this initial statement. Fi users often have a core set of feelings/beliefs that are foundational for ways they feel about other things.

Several examples of thoughts Fi users may have include:
	
	- Considering which of two things is more important to them as a person
	- Identifying how another person feels about something based on their tone of voice, and reasoning with them to find a solution to a problem based on what is most important in the situation.

Fi can be in part thought about as 'individualistic morality'. Fi users put emphasis on an action being beneficial or proper for an individual, sometimes rather than a group. They have very deep and personal thoughts and beliefs on how things should be, and can see this as a sense of identity. Not voicing or claiming to believe in these things, or not being 'true to themselves' is in their eyes, is wrong. Getting lost in the group or giving up their needs for the greater good is for the simple reason that if everybody did it, nobody would get what they wanted. Because of this, every individual should hold to their ideals, and interact on common desires, which in many cases can be best for everybody.

Introverted Feeling allows Fi users a iron hold on what they want. While they often may spend time unraveling their feelings in order to understand what is important to them, the time is well spent when they know what direction they desire to go, where others may be unsure of what they want in the first place.

In short, users of Introverted Feeling use moral and emotional judgement to determine what is right and wrong, significant and insignificant, which enables them to know which goals they want to achieve.

PERCEIVING FUNCTIONSEXTROVERTED PERCEIVING FUNCTIONS

Extroverted Sensing

Extroverted Sensing, or Se, is the sensing method with the extroverted attitude. In this way, it takes in or interprets data in a direct way, and takes its data from externally. It may also be called Extroverted Sensation.

The sensing method takes data from sense perception, meaning sight, sound, taste, touch smell, and from these forms a somewhat concrete construction of whatever it is interpreting as it really is. You might imagine this as taking in data photographically, in a sense. Extroverted Sensing is the sensing method directed outward, so it takes in this sense data externally in a very direct, specific, detailed way. It is concerned about things as they are physically.

Se is very in tune with the environment. It is constantly taking in reality like a stream. For example, an extroverted sensor may be using extroverted sensing to observe how a certain song sounds, or how the ground feels, or what a specific texture looks like, or how the grass waves in the wind. The point being that Se is very attentive to what is happening in the Se user's environment.

An important note needs be made here, everybody can observe their environment, of course, but Extroverted Sensing is a specific way it is done, this will be covered in the next section.

Extroverted Sensors seek to be close to their physical environment, to be part of it, and in tune with what is happening around them. They enjoy being active, going places, and experiencing a wide array of different activities. Often, they like to be in motion, and have trouble sitting still. They also tend to be very observant of their environment, and often pay attention to things that others wouldn't see, and have good reaction times and are very responsive to external stimuli.

In sum, Se takes in external data in a photographic sense, and Extroverted Sensors tend to be very in tune with and observant of their environment because this is what they pay attention to.

Extroverted Intuition

Extroverted Intuition, or Ne, is the intuition method with the extroverted attitude. In this way, it takes in or interprets data in an abstract, general, pattern based way, and takes its data from externally.

Ne is constantly making observations about how things are similar to other things they have seen, and is making predictions on how things might or could unfold. For example, an Ne user would be adept at coming up with synonyms for words, or see a circle, and come up with many different places the circle could be used. In general, they can see something, can come up with many different variations for ways the thing could be used.

This is because Ne takes in the external world rather generally, or 'fuzzily' as some might say. It is not trying to see the world distinctly, but rather to observe, and in some way predict, how things will behave - it is not so concerned with how things are, but rather, how they change. An Ne user might be able to 'see' something moving and predict where it might go. For example, Ne users might be good at finding their way through a crowd by seeing where spaces will open up, or finding different ways to move through the people as they move. They also might be able to hear the first couple words of somebody's sentence, recognize how they might end the sentence based on the beginning, and know the end of the sentence before the person goes to end it. These examples illustrate ways that Ne might observe general trends or patterns, and find different 'paths' or ways it could unfold.

Ne users have very sporadic minds, they often have very quick thought threads, and can go from one subject to another very quickly. By making connections, they might move from fireworks to 18 century art influences in the blink of an eye. The key here is that the concepts are not anchored by reality, but rather in what they are similar to conceptually, which is how Ne looks at them.

Ne users also tend to have many projects and interests, which can seem unrelated. They like to experience an array of different things, in terms of what they include. They are often a 'jack of all trades' and dabble in many things.

In essence, Ne notices the similarities in things by noticing patterns and trends in the external world, and uses that data to make predictions and observations about how things might unfold, or to generate new ideas for variations.


INTROVERTED PERCEIVING FUNCTIONS


Introverted Sensing

Introverted Sensing, or Si, is the sensing method with the introverted attitude. In this way, it takes in or interprets data in a direct way, and takes its data from within. It may also be called Introverted Sensation.

The sensing method takes data from sense perception, meaning sight, sound, taste, touch smell, and from these forms a somewhat concrete construction of whatever it is interpreting as it really is. You might imagine this as taking in data photographically, in a sense. Introverted Sensation takes in sensory data, and tries to create a contextual understanding of something. You might imagine this much like taking many different aerial photographs of an area, and stitching them together to form a detailed picture of the area as a larger whole. The data it draws on is something akin to an internal impression of experiences. As such, they are viewing each photograph less like a painting, and more like a puzzle piece, analogically. As such, you might imagine that when looking at an aerial view, details like the leaves on the tree, or the blades of grass become less pronounced compared to the large field, or the forest. In this same sense, Si does not focus so much on the specific details as it does on the grand layout and schema. Nor in this instance are they really that important; a cartographer cannot work by inches to survey and keep track of land by the acres.

Much like a seasoned warrior who knows what to expect in their next battle, or an architect who has seen dozens of blueprints, Si users have a large array of previous memories and experiences that they draw on to know what to do in a certain similar instances. While Introverted Sensing is not itself equivalent to memory, Si users have a certain way of experiencing and categorizing sense experience that enables them to recall it quite well, in certain cases. They typically are very adept at being able to replicate something they have seen or done before because of this.

Because Si compares different experiences or impressions of things with each other, Si users often recognize when something went well, and when it did not, identify why, and then do what worked well. Essentially, they find what works and what they can depend on, and are typically very reliable people because of it. To them, there is a way to do things that works, and they know it well.

In summation, Si is a function that takes 'snapshots' of the world, which it compares and joins with other similar 'snapshots' to create a grand collage of the world. Si users use this collage to understand the world on a large scale, which they use to determine the way the world really is.


Introverted Intution

Introverted Intuition, or Ni, is the intuition method with the introverted attitude. In this way, it takes in or interprets data in an abstract, general, pattern based way, and takes its data from within.

The intuition method is often referred to as an unconscious one; to the user, it feels as though the information that they are getting from it is not coming out of a specific place, but rather, from within their mind. The intuition method is good at recognizing patterns within data, and making predictions about what might happen based on these patterns. Introverted Intuition then, is very difficult to explain because, explained in this line of reasoning, it is a function that unconsciously finds connections between internal data. If this makes no sense to you, don't fret, quite a few people who have the function often don't understand it (more on this later).

Introverted Intuition notices the connections and similarities between conceptual and contextual data, or in other words, finds patterns in different contexts in order to find underlying understanding about what is actually in each context. Ni, in this way, tries to 'see ahead' in a sense, and see what is outside a certain context based on what is known about it from previous contexts with similar behaviour.

When understanding Introverted Intuition, the words 'perspectives' and 'symbolic' are helpful to understand it. 'Perspectives' is a word describing how something looks from multiple angles. Ni tries to see a certain context from many different angles to understand it. For example, consider how different the perspective of you as a person is between how you see you, and a stranger who sees you on the street might see you. You have been there for your whole life, but they may have seen you once, only for a split second, and may never see you again. While you are the exact same person in each instance, there is a difference in understanding between each viewpoint because of the information that is being looked at. Another example might be comparing the perspectives between how an ant would look from your view, vs how their own experience of their world is. In this way, Introverted Intuition looks at a context from many different angles, near and far, high and low, to understand it as a whole.

'Symbolic' is a word describing something standing for something else. Imagine you are browsing a website, and see a 'home' button, or 'menu' button. You can infer that if you click the button, it will take you to the 'home' page, or to the menu, respectively, even if you haven't done that one this particular site prior. In this way, Ni sees everything 'symbolically', as if simply by the way it appears, it has an implication on what will follow, or has more data to it. This aspect of Ni is perhaps what Ni users sometimes call 'vibes', where they say they know something about something that they couldn't have beforehand witnessed. For example, they might have only met somebody briefly, but might predict that they will know that they will be good friends with this person. As said just a moment ago, this data comes from Ni working unconsciously, so they can't quite say exactly where the data is coming from, and that they 'just know'. Suffice it to say that Ni enables Ni users to make predictions based on previous data.

In summation, Ni looks at data from many different perspectives to make predictions about the real extent of the data, enabling them to know where things might go before actually seeing how they unfold.

(notes, paradox of Ni, Ni paranoia, symbolics)


Summary and Conclusion

This short list summarizes each function and what it does, generally.

Te - Analyzes the mechanical behaviour of external objects

Ti - Analyzes the mechanical nature of ideas and systems

Fe - Assesses the value and worth of external things

Fi - Determines what is most important in general.

Se - Observes external data, in a photographic and direct sense.

Ne - Predicts paths and generates variations by recognizing similarities in external data

Si - Creates a continuous map of the conceptual world by creating libraries of contexts

Ni - Uses trends and similarities to find out where things are going, in a general sense.

In the next section, we will discuss how exactly these functions work in the human psyche, and in what way people have them, and use them.

Extroduction




